“A Pleasant Place for the World to Hide”:
Exploring Themes of Utopian Play in Ready
Player One
justin nordstrom
abstract
Ernest Cline’s 2011 novel Ready Player One offers an imaginary world that
is simultaneously utopian and dystopian, because it portrays an immersive
game-obsessed world that fuses high-tech virtual reality with 1980s nostal-
gia. Characters contrast their grim apocalyptic reality with escapism through
worldwide gaming in the OASIS, a massively multiplayer VR world allowing
players to travel into space, experience high fantasy, attend lavish parties, or
simply socialize with friends. Cline’s novel achieved significant acclaim, but
few writers have considered the scholarly merits of the book, particularly as an
example of the overlapping functions of gaming and utopianism. This article
examines Ready Player One alongside Bernard Suits’ philosophical approach
to defining games and utopia. Ready Player One explicitly plays with ideas
of eutopia and dystopia, games within games, reality and escapist play. As
such, it is an excellent environment to examine Suits’ philosophy of games and
showcase why gaming is essential to utopian fiction, particularly in the early
twenty-first century. For Cline, games are equally necessary for a dytopia for
much the same reason—they allow a creative and social “escape hatch” from
the grim realities of futuristic decline.
keywords: science fiction, contemporary fiction, game theory, utopianism
Ernest Cline’s debut novel Ready Player One presents readers with a futuristic
world steeped in paradox. Cline imagines an environment
that is simultaneously eutopian and dystopian and depicts an ­ immersive
­ game-obsessed world that fuses high-tech virtual reality with 1980s
­ nostalgia. The characters contrast their grim apocalyptic reality (in the
throes of worldwide economic, environmental, and social collapse) with
escapism through worldwide gaming in the OASIS, a massively ­ multiplayer
VR world that allows players to travel into space, experience high fantasy,
attend lavish parties, or simply socialize with friends. The narrator and
protagonist, a teenage boy named Wade Watts, achieves stardom in the
OASIS by finding keys to a giant puzzle, programmed into the VR environ-
ment as a decade-long “Easter Egg Hunt” that promises tremendous wealth
and prestige to whoever completes the game’s riddles and challenges.
Pursing his online quest to gather clues for the “Hunt,” Wade taps into the
trivia of the 1980s (the favorite decade of the OASIS’ programmer, and pop
culture icon, James Halliday). As a result, Ready Player One is a montage of
futuristic dystopianism, retro 1980s kitsch, and virtual reality gaming, all
in the form of a Willy-Wonka-esque quest to find a hidden reward in an
­ over-the-top fantasy setting.1
Ready Player One has achieved significant attention since its publica-
tion in 2011, earning the Prometheus Award for Science Fiction and the
American Library Association’s Alex Award (both in 2012).2 It was reviewed
by the New York Times, London Guardian, and several science fiction and
mass-market periodicals, and was quickly optioned by Warner Brothers
(although plans to adapt the novel to the big screen have recently stalled).
Considering the book’s emphasis on gamers and pop culture, most reviewers
describe Cline’s novel as an homage to the 1980s and a tribute to games and
geekery. Reviewer Chris Kammerud, for instance, described Ready Player
One as “A love story, and epic quest, an interstellar adventure, and a carnival
of Gen-X nostalgia”3 Writer John Scalzi, reflecting on the book’s emphasis
on role-playing adventures, John Hughes movies, and video games, summed
the book up more succinctly, calling Cline’s novel “a nerdgasm.”4
Nevertheless, scholars of popular culture and science fiction have not
yet considered the scholarly merits of Ready Player One, particularly as an
example of the overlapping functions of gaming and utopianism. In par-
ticular, Cline’s novel presents some of the same tensions that motivate other
classic utopian texts—such as an ambiguously eutopian/ dystopian setting
and characters that look forward to a futuristic environment while glancing
backward at the past.
In this article, I examine Ready Player One from two overlapping perspec-
tives. First, I discuss Ready Player One as an expression of the interplay
between utopian and dystopia, demonstrating the malleability of these terms
in Cline’s description of a global gaming community. Second, I argue that
Ready Player One provides significant insight into two important theories
of game play and its utopian possibilities—Bernard Suits’ The Grasshopper:
Games, Life and Utopia (originally published in 1978) and Jane McGonigal’s
Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make Us Better and How They Change the
World (2011). Taken together, writings by Cline, Suits, and McGonigal all
demonstrate that utopian aspiration and game play are inherently interre-
lated. These writers share an understanding that games and play, far from
being frivolous distractions or mindless pursuits, become an integral part of
individual happiness and group cohesion. For each of these writers, gaming
and utopia can go hand in hand.5
Yet, while Suits presents a one-dimensional vision of games as the sole
activity in achieving “the good life” and experiencing utopia, Cline and
McGonigal express reservations. For these writers, as well as the charac-
ters in Ready Player One, gaming is a double-edged sword with dystopian
as well as utopian traits. Players, McGonigal and Cline remind us, experi-
ence extremes of elation and despair. And, their work suggests, games can
be promote social interaction and enhance relationships but can also give
participants a reason to withdraw into isolation, indifferent to the world
around them. As one of the OASIS programmers admits in Ready Player
One, games can help improve a world beset by complex problems, or they
can be “a pleasant place for the world to hide.”6 Cline’s work succeeds, both
as an engaging novel and as a window into the utopian genre, because he
avoids a simplistic vision of utopian play expressed by Bernard Suits and
embraces the paradoxical notion that play can be disruptive, even detri-
mental, to individual happiness and society as a whole. This view, demon-
strated by McGonigal, permeates Ready Player One as Cline demonstrates
both the utopian and dystopian possibilities of gaming in a futuristic world.
a utopia based on play?
The most essential and important feature of the utopian genre is its malle-
ability. Utopian aspirations rely fundamentally on an interplay between
the author’s imagined utopian world and the conventional world of the
reader. The term “interplay” here is appropriate, because the act of writing a
utopian novel is itself a form of play—a way of gamifying (which, as will be
demonstrated below, essentially means “enjoyably complicating”) the social
theorization or polemicizing that is part of the utopian project.
Nevertheless, a focus on games and play might seem like an unusual
perspective on the utopian genre. After all, in utopian classics written
in the sixteenth through early twentieth centuries, games and play form
a peripheral part of the central narrative. Characters in utopian fiction,
such as More’s Utopia, Bellamy’s Looking Backward, and Gilman’s Herland
(a brief sample of classic utopias to which dozens more could be added)
occasionally engage in forms of play, but these activities do not elicit much
discussion or explanation. In Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s all-female utopia
Herland, for instance, women play a game using a tripod of sticks, with a
stone balanced at the center. The goal for Herlanders is to carefully knock
off the stone without disrupting the sticks underneath. The novel’s male
visitors misunderstand this and flight rocks with all their might, knocking
down the whole structure. Thus, a seemingly enjoyable act of play becomes
a metaphor for men’s brute force and aggression. Likewise, More’s Utopia
­ features a checkerslike board game, in which virtues capture ­ vices—a
demonstration, More suggests, of how Utopians find ways to include
­ moralistic instruction even in leisure time.7 Yet, while traditional utopias
are not completely devoid of games, readers are left with the impression
that utopians are ­ nose-to-the-grindstone types. Perfecting society, uto-
pian authors are want to point out, is not a frivolous task. Games, when
they are mentioned at all, generally serve to highlight important roles and
­ responsibilities—reinforcing utopians’ social hierarchies or moral sensibili-
ties. Utopians might play games, but they don’t just play for fun.
Recently, however, utopian scholars have challenged this assumption,
particularly Philip Abbott in his essay “Utopians at Play.” Abbott begins by
recognizing that utopianism “has been widely criticized as [a genre] that
is especially characterized by its absence of play. Activity that is enjoyable,
lacking extrinsic goals . . . spontaneous and voluntary is regarded by crit-
ics as the antimony of utopia.” Abbott cites Jean Elshtain, Leonard Shapiro,
Karl Popper, and other scholars who regard utopia as antithetical to play
(I would add Edward Rothstein and Krisna Kumar to this list).8
Yet unlike these writers, Abbott insists that “there is an identifiable
domain of play in the utopian genre” not merely in “authorial playfulness”
but in the “actual presentation of games, festivals and recreation in the
accounts of everyday life in utopia.” In other words, utopian writers such as
Plato, Bacon, Bellamy, Gilman, Piercy, and others demonstrate utopian play
in two ways. Through puns, jokes, nonsense words, and banter, utopian
writers (especially More himself) embrace playfulness and wordplay. And,
by imagining games and festivals, utopian authors reveal their characters
not only as diligent worker bees building a perfect society, but as human
beings enjoying themselves. Thus, Abbott concludes, “Playfulness enables
the utopian author to keep his project framed in an imaginative realm and
thus avoid the anti-utopian charge of utopian boredom and totalitarian-
ism.”9 Ultimately, utopian visions could not possibly be antithetical to play
and games. How could they be, we might wonder, since in a perfect society
there would be few other activities for residents to perform (a point that
anticipates Suits’ definition of both utopia and games, outlined below).
In what follows, I extend this examination of utopian games through
the lens of Cline’s Ready Player One to demonstrate the role of gaming in
both utopian and dystopian contexts. Wade, the novel’s narrator and pro-
tagonist, is a lonely, orphaned teenage boy who lives in a slum complex
of trailers on the outskirts of Oklahoma City. The novel takes place in
2044, and depicts a bleak landscape of overcrowded cities, endemic food
shortages, and social malaise. The world is crumbling, faced with poverty,
environmental collapse, and global violence. But Wade does attempt to
escape this bitter reality by logging onto the Ontologically Anthropocentric
Sensory Immersive Simulation. Nicknamed “The Oasis,” this computer
software creates a gigantic online universe that has reshaped society, and is
essentially humanity’s electronic refuge from the environmental and social
deterioration of the twenty-first-century world.
Wade underscores the contrast between this online utopia and the dis-
mal environment of the “real” world, saying “Things used to be awesome,
but now they’re kinda terrifying. . . . Human civilization is in ‘decline.’ Some
people even say it’s ‘collapsing.’” In contrast, Wade initially views the OASIS
with unbridled enthusiasm. “Luckily, I had access to the OASIS, which was
like having an escape hatch into a better reality. . . . It was my playground
and my preschool, a magical place where anything was possible. The OASIS
is the setting of all my happiest childhood memories.”10
an online utopia
While Wade’s quest to navigate the OASIS forms one setting for Ready
Player One, the novel mirrors Wade’s upbringing with that of the OASIS
programmer James Halliday. Like Wade, Halliday was often lonely and had
difficulty connecting with his family. Both Wade and Halliday are socially
ostracized, but both find a refuge in gaming and form a close-knit circle of
fellow gamers. For Wade, this translates into a passion for Halliday’s Easter
Egg Hunt. Like most “gunters” (egg hunters), Wade obsessively studies
1980s pop culture and games to reveal clues that Halliday might have left in
the OASIS. Wade’s goal is to navigate online puzzles to claim the ultimate
prize, ownership of Halliday’s software company, immense wealth, and
virtually unlimited control of the OASIS itself.
Wade often reflects on the importance of the “Hunt” and the OASIS
as a source for his own identity. “My generation had never known a world
without the OASIS. To us, it was much more than a game or an entertain-
ment platform. It had been an integral part of our lives for as far back as
we could remember. We’d been born into an ugly world, and the OASIS
was our one happy refuge.”11 Not only does Wade’s experience of growing
up obsessed with video games and 1980s kitsch resemble James Halliday’s
boyhood, it also resonates with Cline himself. In an interview published
after the release of Ready Player One, Cline points out, “I grew up con-
suming mass quantities of science fiction novels, Dungeons and Dragons
supplements, comic books, movies, and video games. And I never really
outgrew any of it. Like most geeks of my generation, I still adore all of the
pop culture of my youth.”12
In this way, Ready Player One presents a classic trope of the utopian
genre, shifting the chronological focus of time itself. One of the conventions
of the genre is to disorient the reader, as a way of introducing perspectives
on society and social change that might normally be rejected out of hand.
This is clearly the case in the prototypical utopian novel of the nineteenth
century, Edward Bellamy’s Looking Backward. Bellamy’s protagonist falls
asleep in the year 1886 and wakes up in the year 2000 to find America sud-
denly transformed into a virtual paradise through the government control
of employment and industry. Late in the novel, Bellamy describes a vivid
nightmare in which his central character returns to the nineteenth century.
His gentleman narrator, once steeped in Gilded-Age decadence, is appalled
at the era’s inequality, and frustrated by his efforts to explain the mutual
cooperation that shaped his futuristic vision. Bellamy uses these chronolog-
ical shifts to underscore and move between their respective eutopian and
dystopian settings.
In Ready Player One, Cline does the same thing, but what facilitates
the contrast between a dystopian present and its possible eutopian alter-
native is not dreams and wakefulness, as with Bellamy. Instead, Cline uses
games and play to constantly shift between eutopian and dystopian settings.
However, Cline extends the simple coin-operated arcade games that per-
meated his youth (and the experience of his character, Halliday) to imagine
a truly immersive and global electronic world in the OASIS. This VR envi-
ronment, Wade explains, completely transformed society. “The OASIS
would ultimately change the way people around the world lived, worked,
and communicated. . . . Even though it was initially marketed as a new
kind of massively multiplayer online game, the OASIS quickly evolved into
a new way of life.”13 It won’t be until the novel’s conclusion that Wade sees
the potential damage of this online escapism, both for individuals and the
global community.
In the real world, Wade is abused, orphaned, lonely, and hopeless.
But, in the OASIS, he enjoys school, excels in many classes, hangs out with
friends. In a sense, the OASIS is the inverse of Wade’s ordinary experiences.
However, he explains, one group that threatens this idyllic environment,
and the tranquil OASIS itself, is a massive technology corporation—IOI
(Innovative Online Industries), which hopes to control the OASIS by
winning Halliday’s contest, using underhanded, even violent means.
Throughout the novel, IOI employees threaten and even attempt to kill
gamers that are getting close to winning the contest, including Wade and
several of his friends.
Agents for IOI (called “The Sixers” because they have six digit num-
bers, rather than names, for their login identities) are the story’s villains, not
only because they use real-life violence and intimidation but also because
they challenge the OASIS’s idyllic environment itself. Wade explains: “The
moment IOI took it over, the OASIS would cease to be the open-source
virtual utopia I’d grown up in. It would become a corporate-run dystopia,
an overpriced theme park for wealthy elitists.”14
This juxtaposition between the OASIS as an online “escape hatch” from
reality and the threats of dystopian encroachment make Ready Player One
a deeply contradictory utopian novel. Cline’s “real world” of 2044 is crum-
bling apart, but most of the novel takes places in a blissful online environ-
ment featuring interstellar exploration, high adventure, engaging (and free)
public education, and social interaction to anyone at any time. In short,
Ready Player One features overlapping paradoxes—a utopia within a dysto-
pia, a futuristic setting obsessed with the past, and characters playing elab-
orate games within the broader gaming environment of the OASIS itself.
The OASIS’s “gunters” like Wade compete in matches of classic 1980s video
games, solve puzzles, play cinematic role-playing games pretending to be
characters in Halliday’s favorite movies, and navigate a “Tomb of Horrors”
modeled after a Dungeons and Dragons adventure. As Wade points out on
his quest to solve Halliday’s egg hunt, “All of the intervening layers slipped
away, and I lost myself in the game within the game.”15
But perhaps the most paradoxical facet of Ready Player One is charac-
ters’ changing perceptions of the OASIS itself. While Halliday and Wade
initially view the OASIS with optimism, even reverence, Cline also presents
a perspective of the OASIS not as a haven but as a corrupting influence, nur-
turing isolation and global indifference. Halliday’s business partner, Ogden
Morrow, becomes so disillusioned at humanity’s escape to the OASIS that he
argues with Halliday and later laments “the OASIS has evolved into some-
thing horrible” and “had become a self-imposed prison for humanity.”16
the big red button
The recurring question in Cline’s novel is whether online games like the
OASIS enhance or reduce interpersonal communication, education, and
social interaction. Both Wade and Halliday long for isolation and escape
from the “real world,” seeing the OASIS as their refuge from emotional pain
and the hardships of everyday life. Though normally a social recluse, Wade’s
skills in OASIS gaming make him a celebrity “gunter,” winning product
endorsements, making a fortune, and exciting his adoring fans. “In the
OASIS,” Wade points out, “I got invited to the most exclusive parties. I went
to all the hippest clubs and never had to wait in line. I was a pop-culture
icon, a VR rock star. And, in gunter circles, I was a legend. Nay, a god.”17
Wade’s enthusiasm wavers as he pursues the “Hunt.” At one point,
Wade looks at his bleak surroundings and sophisticated OASIS equipment
and admits, “I’d come to see my rig for what it was: an elaborate contraption
for deceiving my senses, to allow me to live in a world that didn’t exist. Each
component of my rig was a bar in the cell where I had willingly imprisoned
myself. . . . In real life, I was nothing but an antisocial hermit. . . . I was just
another sad, lost, lonely soul, wasting his life on a glorified video game.”
During one of the few scenes in the book in which Wade actually goes out-
doors, he hints at the deterioration and despondency that permeate society
“A thick film of neglect . . . covered everything in sight. The streets, the
buildings, the people.”18
This realization mirrors Wade’s own views of the broader world. When
his friend (and the novel’s love interest) Art3mis asks him what he would
do with the staggering sums of money left in Halliday’s will, Wade instantly
replies that he’d live out the rest of his life on a spaceship, as far away from
the problems of the world as he can get. Wade says he’d spend his life play-
ing video games and watching movies—a decision that seems abhorrent
to Art3mis, who hopes to use the winnings to fight global starvation. But
Wade’s ambiguous outlook toward the OASIS and human decline through-
out the novel prompts him to revise his earlier escapist longings. When he
ultimately succeeds in winning the “Hunt,” Wade revises his previous plan
to abandon the world, vowing “to feed everyone on the planet” and “make
the world a better place.”19
Cline’s OASIS setting is simultaneously utopian and dystopian—as it
enhances education and ignites a player’s imagination on one hand, and
leads to abandonment of the world’s pressing needs on the other. Perhaps
the clearest demonstration of this OASIS ambiguity occurs at the novel’s
concluding scene. Having completed the “Hunt,” Wade gains control of
Halliday’s OASIS (both as a majority stockholder in the conventional world
and as an omnipotent online avatar in its online format). But Wade’s most
perplexing reward is yet to come—a digital image of James Halliday appears
before him and shows Wade “the Big Red Button” which Halliday describes
by saying, “If you press it, it will shut off the entire OASIS and launch a
worm that will delete everything . . . including all of the OASIS source code.
It will shut does the OASIS forever.” The fact that Halliday would offer the
possibility of irrevocably destroying his own creation, suggests the ambigu-
ous place that gaming holds in Cline’s utopia. While the novel doesn’t reveal
whether Wade obliterates the online world that had previously given him
solace, Halliday’s avatar provides one final piece of advice, which might
serve as Cline’s cautionary tale to all OASIS “gunters”—“I created the OASIS
because I never felt at home in the real world. . . . Don’t make the same mis-
take I did. Don’t hide in here forever.”20
grasshoppers and gamers
While Cline adopts a nuanced perspective on games, arguing that ­ players
experience both elation and despair, philosopher Bernard Suits’ ­ classic
account of game playing takes an approach that is emphatically, even
euphorically, positive. In The Grasshopper: Games, Life and Utopia, Suits
begins by turning the classic Aesop’s fable of the ant and the grasshopper
on its head. In the traditional story, the hard-working ant prepares for
the winter and turns his back on the carefree grasshopper, who played
throughout the summer, and later comes begging to the ant during a chilly
snowstorm. Suits writes his discussion of games as a lecture by the grass-
hopper and his various disciples on the virtues of play and the necessity of
games, arguing that we should view the grasshopper’s whimsical attitude as
the key to the good life.
Discussing the contradictory attitudes of grasshopper and ant, Suits
maintains: “If there were no winters to guard against, then the Grasshopper
would not get his come-uppance nor the ant his shabby victory. The life of
the Grasshopper would be vindicated and that of the ant absurd.” In a uto-
pia (removed from the dangers of starvation and other worldly concerns)
all people would be grasshoppers—spending their days in a constant state
of play. Due to “accelerating advances in technology,” the grasshopper con-
tinues, “the time will come when there are in fact no winters. We may there-
fore conclude that although my timing may be a bit off, my way of life is not
wrong in principle.”21
While this grasshopper/ant dynamic describes the frame story of Suits’
book, most of the text is dedicated to formulating and testing Suits’ own
definition of games themselves. The impetus for this endeavor, Suits states
in his preface, is the “widespread disenchantment with the search for defini-
tions that currently prevails in the philosophical community” as evidenced
by Ludwig Wittgenstein’s observation that games are undefinable, and, by
extension, that the search for any definition is ultimately hopeless.22
Not so, argues Suits, who examines many facets of gameplay before
arriving at a fairly long definition: “To play a game is to engage in activity
directed towards bringing about a specific state of affairs, using only means
permitted by rules, where rules prohibit more efficient in favour of less effi-
cient means.” Or, to put it simply: “Playing a game is the voluntary attempt
to overcome unnecessary obstacles.”23 One implication of Suits’ definition,
ironically, is that it means he is playing a game in the writing of this book
itself. By creating a frame story of the grasshopper, ant, and disciples, Suits
is adhering to the “rules” of a fable (it must tell a story about the interaction
between animals to convey a broader social message) while advancing his
approach to games. The most “efficient” method of conveying his definition
would be to simply state it bluntly at the outset, but Suits chooses the “less
efficient” route of concocting an elaborate story based on debating insects.24
Nevertheless, after addressing potential challenges to this definition
and discussing whether this explanation of games would apply to activi-
ties such as playing Cops and Robbers and Ring around the Rosie (Suits
replies—yes to the former and no to the latter), the grasshopper delivers a
long soliloquy on the question: “Why must a life freed from the necessity to
work be identical with a life dedicated to games?” Suits’ understanding of
utopia supposes “All of the things ordinarily called work are now done by
wholly automated machines. . . . There are so many goods being produced
so abundantly that even the most acquisitive cravings . . . are instantly sat-
isfied. . . . Yachts, diamonds, racing cars . . . and trips around the world are
easily plucked from the environment.”25
Amidst such abundance, Suits’ grasshopper reasons, “There is no longer
any competition for love, attention, approval, or admiration, just as there
is no longer any strife in the acquisition of material goods.” Friendships
and romantic partners, Suits concludes, would be “every bit as accessible
as yachts and diamonds” due to advances in interpersonal psychology, and
without the day-to-day worries of earning a living. Suits’ vision of utopia
is also free from the constraints of government or a legal system: “With no
competing claims for goods requiring legislation and adjudication, there is
no need for government.”26
divergent views of a gaming utopia
This perspective underscores one of many parallels between the utopias
imagined by Suits and Cline. Both envision a future devoid of government
and laws, but for diametrically opposite reasons. Cline’s crumbling, impov-
erished world has simply given up on the idea of order and stability outside
of the OASIS. Wade explains: “The once-great country into which I’d been
born now resembled its former self in name only. It didn’t matter who was
in charge. Those people were rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic and
everyone knew it.”27 But Suits’ grasshopper imagines utopia as something
entirely different. Ultimately, he insists, “Utopia is just a dramatization
of the ideal of existence, and evil and wrong-doing are obviously incon-
sistent with such an ideal.” As are, he would add, politicians, lawyers, and
bureaucrats.28
On a broader level, Suits’ description of a highly technical, computer-
ized, environment where travel, adventure, and interpersonal relationships
are all perfected and available every moment is identical to the OASIS in
Ready Player One. Suits’ grasshopper argues that, since humanity’s every
need could be easily and instantly satisfied in the highly technical utopia
he has described, playing games remains “as the only remaining candidate
for Utopian occupation, and therefore the only possible remaining constit-
uent of the ideal of existence.” Other pursuits, such as building a house,
might be undertaken, the grasshopper continues, but since more efficient
methods of creating a home are widely available in a fully automated utopia
(generating a building with robotics or merely by pressing a button) the
carpenter would, according to Suits’ definition, be playing a game (build-
ing a house using less efficient, rather than more efficient means). Thus, “a
Utopian could engage in all of the achieving activities that normally occupy
people in the non-Utopian world, but . . . the quality, so to speak, of such
endeavours would be quite different.”29
Like Suits’ utopian carpenter, Cline’s OASIS users become architects of
not only futuristic homes but of entire VR worlds, constructing (or, more
specifically, programming) them even though such buildings are inefficient
(OASIS avatars don’t need shelter or sleep, and there are thousands of pre-
made worlds already created for avatars to use). One “gunter” meticulously
designs a private chat room to resemble a 1980s rec center (complete with
low-tech VCRs and outdated Atari consoles, which would also be “ineffi-
cient” since users have instant access to every type of media at any time
through their OASIS consoles). Likewise, Wade goes out of his way to
design a secret hideaway on an asteroid in a remote corner of the OASIS
universe. Though Wade arranges his lair with flashy architecture and space
for flying vehicles and menacing weapons, ultimately he is the only OASIS
avatar to see his construction. This act of gaming-as-construction, which,
for Suits, represents an ideal of “gamifying” ordinary life, comes to repre-
sent Wade’s solitude and OASIS isolation.
While Suits and Cline take divergent perspectives on gaming’s social
influence, they agree that the term “game” can be applied to a host of activi-
ties beyond the familiar products like Monopoly or Scrabble. Cline’s OASIS
users experience an entire game-based world, but can also tour a “museum”
of the earliest video games—these “games within a game” form an impor-
tant backdrop to characters’ experience in the OASIS. Likewise, Suits’ phi-
losophy pushes the understanding of games to its outer limits. Plumbing,
carpentry, writing, and storytelling all have the potential to be “games” in
Suits’ view. Ultimately, in a 1967 article, Suits wonders aloud, “Is life a game
we are playing.”30
It should come as no surprise, then, that Suits views literary genres as a
type of game between reader and author. In a 1985 essay, Suits demonstrates
how the detective story “is simply a puzzle to be solved by the reader.” That
is, detective fiction presents a puzzle in which the reader must attempt to
identify the murderer in the story before the author reveals the identity.
Suits argues that detective novelists, like baseball pitchers and crossword
puzzle creators, are playing an elaborate game with readers, specifically a
“two-move puzzle-game which permits the involvement of both author and
reader as players.” Like any game, Suits continues, the “detective puzzle”
must follow identifiable rules—the writer, for example, must have the mur-
derer be one of the characters mentioned in the plot (rather than simply
revealing a brand-new actor at the story’s conclusion). The reader, mean-
while, must read pages sequentially (thus, the reader employs a less efficient
means of deducing the murderer’s identity, rather than just skipping to the
story’s final page).31
While Suits presents some ways in which other literary forms (such as
the sonnet) might be viewed as games, his extensive discussion of Utopia
in The Grasshopper suggests that utopian fiction might produce just such
a “gamified” vision of literature. Alongside the detective story, the uto-
pian novel (such as More’s Utopia or Bellamy’s Looking Backward or other
classics of the genre) requires both authors and readers to accept certain
roles and rules. The utopian author must use the framework of a story
(usually including a remote setting, intrepid visitors to a distant land, and
outspoken guides who explain the society’s history and structure). So,
utopian novelists (in contrasts to writers of manifestos or other political
tracts) play their role in this game by adopting a less efficient method
(contriving a utopian setting and frame story) rather than a more effec-
tive method (a straightforward essay on necessary social change). In this
way, like Suits’ own invention of philosophical insects in The Grasshopper,
utopian novelists are playing a game, or “gamifying” their own vision of
the ideal society.
Six years after publishing The Grasshopper, Suits contributed an essay
entitled “The Grasshopper: Posthumous Reflections on Utopia.” He began
by arguing that the Cockaygne fantasy of Medieval Europe are “an early ver-
sion of a society enjoying well advanced automation” like the type outlined
by The Grasshopper. In such an environment, “unless people play games in
Utopia there will be nothing whatever to do, and everyone will die—or go
mad—of boredom.”32
At the conclusion of this essay, the grasshopper exacts his final revenge
on the miserly ant, pointing out humanity’s need for games with the inev-
itable arrival of full-scale automation. “The ants all exhort us to store up
food for winter, but the more serious problem is to store up games for sum-
mer,” which will come sooner than we expect.33
Like Cline, Suits anticipates the proliferation of increasingly complex
games as the world becomes more technologically engrossed. Suits’ grass-
hopper, if he were to survive enough winters to experience Cline’s world of
2044, would likely view the OASIS with the same wide-eyed amazement
that Wade himself did at the outset of Ready Player One. But Suits’ utopia
is one without a downside, one in which players never tire of games (and,
he suggests, one in which games themselves have been perfected so as not
to produce the malaise that haunts Halliday and Wade). Cline, however,
avoids such simplification. For him, games can be positive and engaging
when experienced in moderate doses, but can also reveal a destructive dys-
topian side, alienating players, even threatening the world itself. In the end,
we can understand why Wade would be tempted to push the big red button
at the novel’s conclusion and obliterate the online game that he had once
loved.
the ambiguity of gaming
Suits concludes The Grasshopper with a prophecy of the future. Summarizing
all of his wisdom, the grasshopper contends, “Games we play in our
non-Utopian lives are intimations of things to come.” As humanity moves
ever closer to full-scale automation and computerization of work and daily
life, the grasshopper explains, games become “clues to the future. And their
serious cultivation now is perhaps our only salvation.”34 This perspective
on the necessity of gaming certainly resonates with the writings of Jane
McGonigal, one of the most outspoken and influential commentators on
the role of digital gaming in contemporary life. McGonigal shares Suits’
emphasis on the utopian possibilities of play, but sees games as essential,
not only as foreshadowing the future, but in shaping everyday life in the
present.
In her bestselling book Reality Is Broken, McGonigal asks, “Where, in
the real world, is that gamer sense of being fully alive, focused, and engaged
in every moment? Where is the gamer feeling of power, heroic purpose, and
community? . . . Reality isn’t engineered to maximize our potential. Reality
wasn’t designed from the bottom up to make us happy.”35 McGonigal notes
that gaming produces a sense of wonder and awe that is generally miss-
ing from everyday experience. This is similar to Wade’s description of elec-
tronic gaming—amidst the OASIS’s impressive graphic interface, Wade still
feels drawn to “classic” video games from bygone decades. “These games”
he explains, “were outdated digital dinosaurs. . . . But I was a gunter, so
I didn’t think of them as quant low-res antiques. . . . When I played the
classics, I did so with a determined sort of reverence.”36
Reality Is Broken references Suits several times and summarizes his
definition of games: “Playing a game is the voluntary attempt to overcome
unnecessary obstacles.” But McGonigal adds a critical question of her own,
“Why do unnecessary obstacles make us happy?” Her response is remark-
ably straightforward—“Games make us happy because they are hard work
that we choose for ourselves.” That is, games are addictive and engaging
in ways that the rest of life is not, because games provide the satisfaction
of overcoming a challenge with the sense of self-determination, the feel-
ing of choosing an activity we enjoy. Games have been increasing in popu-
larity throughout the world not just because they are escapist, McGonigal
contends, but because games provide “a concentrated state of optimistic
engagement. . . . We are actively conditioning our minds and bodies to be
happier.”37
In her early chapters, McGonigal seems to echo Suits’ observation that
gaming is synonymous with “the good life” and provokes unbridled enjoy-
ment. “Computer and video games are fulfilling genuine human needs that
the real world is currently unable to satisfy. Games are providing rewards
that reality is not. . . . They bring us together in ways that reality is not.”
Likewise, Cline’s Ready Player One illustrates how gaming can provide a
sense of accomplishment and direction that is often absent in players’ lives.
In describing OASIS history, Wade explains how his life was changed when
“the Hunt for Halliday’s Easter Egg began. That was what saved me, I think.
Suddenly, I’d found something worth doing. . . . Something to look forward
to. The moment I began searching for the egg, the future no longer seemed
so bleak”38
As Reality Is Broken points out, people throughout the world spend
“more than 3 billion hours a week gaming,” suggesting that the OASIS-
obsessed society outlined in Ready Player One is not such an unlikely
development. McGonigal argues that humanity’s “exodus from reality” will
likely continue, even accelerate in the coming years but comforts readers
by explaining how games can become “a surprising, inventive, and effec-
tive way to intervene in a social crisis,” even becoming “potential solutions
to our most pressing social problems.” Rather than bemoaning gaming’s
popularity, McGonigal and Cline see games as an inevitable and essential
part of society for future generations. While Cline points to MMOs and
social networking as the foundation for OASIS gameplay, McGonigal sees
skillful game developers urging players to improve communication skills
and cooperation through gaming. McGonigal concludes (in a statement
that OASIS users like Wade would applaud), “Games, in the twenty-first
century, will be a primary platform for enabling the future.”39
Yet, McGonigal cautions, it is precisely this rush of enthusiasm and
excitement that gives games the potential to limit players’ social interaction
and engagement with the real world. While games provide a psychologi-
cal sense of “flow” or timelessness and intense concentration, McGonigal
warns, “Too much flow can lead to happiness burnout.” So, for McGonigal
as well as Cline, games are a double-edged sword. They can lead to escapism
and indifference or cause players to become despondent at the real world’s
stifling limitations. But the reverse is also true—games can enhance social
bonds, facilitate teamwork, improve education, and motivate players toward
a greater engagement in the world around them. As McGonigal puts it,
“games can be a real solution to problems and a real source of happiness.”40
As a result, she maintains, “the central dilemma of the game industry”
in recent years, and the challenge McGonigal herself highlights in Reality
Is Broken, is “how to enable gamers to play more without diminishing their
real lives.”41 This same question permeates Ready Player One, and antici-
pates the book’s conclusion in which Wade completes the “Hunt” and meets
the online representation of his idol James Halliday. The ultimate irony in
Cline’s OASIS utopia is that its programmer, James Halliday, views his VR
creation not with pride or veneration (as many “gunters” would) but with a
degree of skepticism, even scorn. Wade’s “prize” for winning the “Hunt” is
not only money and fame, but that he alone possesses the ability to destroy
the OASIS entirely—a paradox that mirrors the novel’s contradictions on
gaming itself. And Wade’s motivation, at the novel’s conclusion, is to sus-
pend gaming in favor of real-world relationships and engagement. Halliday,
by programming himself into the OASIS’ ultimate scene, is able to impart
an important perspective to gamers like Wade: “I realized, as terrifying and
painful as reality can be, it’s also the only place where you can find true
happiness. Because reality is real.”42
This interplay between the “game” and the “real” is what rests at the
heart of the utopian genre, and where Ready Player One can contribute
most to our understanding of the utopian tradition. The foundational
aspect of utopian fiction is to complicate the reader’s understanding
of the expectations and mores that constitute reality. Utopian writing
consists of “estrangement”—disorienting readers so that they challenge
normal reality and, conversely, accept ideas or alternatives they might
ordinarily dismiss. Like Looking Backward, Ready Player One leaves
the reader unbalanced—not certain whether any particular setting (the
OASIS or conventional world) is to be embraced or avoided. Doing this
requires not the simplistic assessment of games as wholly utopian pro-
jects, as Suits argues. Instead, Kline’s novel embodies a more nuanced
understanding of utopianism itself—in which the seemingly idealized
world of the OASIS is actually perilous and the apocalyptic conventional
world is one worth saving, even celebrating. By playing with the conven-
tions of gaming, Ready Player One embodies the paradoxical elements of
utopian fiction itself.
justin nordstrom is an associate professor of history at Penn State
Hazleton, where he teaches courses on American history, utopian literature,
and globalization. His research focuses on American cultural history, print
culture, and food history from the late nineteenth through the twenty-first
centuries.
notes
4. 5. 6. 1. Ernest Cline, Ready Player One (New York: Crown, 2011). I am grateful to sev-
eral members of the Society for Utopian Studies for their input on this essay,
especially Francesco Crosso, Stephanie Boluk, Lyman Sargent, Gib Prettyman,
and Brian Greenspan.
2. On Cline’s awards, see “2012 Prometheus Best Novel Winners Announced,”
accessed July 17, 2012, http://www.lfs.org/releases/2012Winners.shtml and “Alex
Awards,” accessed July 30, 2012, http://www.ala.org/yalsa/alex-awards.
3. Chris Kammerud, “Ready Player One by Ernest Cline,” Strange Horizons,
February 20, 2012, accessed July 30, 2012, http://www.strangehorizons.com/
reviews/2012/02/ready_player_on.shtml. For other reviews of Ready Player One,
see Janet Maslin “A Future Wrapped in 1980s Culture,” New York Times, August
14, 2011; Eric Brown, “Science Fiction Choice—Reviews,” Guardian (London),
August 4, 2011. On Warner Bros. studio purchasing the rights to Cline’s book,
see Angela Watercutter, “Fanboys Scribe Pens Ultimate Nerd Sci-Fi Novel,
Ready Player One,” Wired Magazine, August 15, 2011, accessed July 30, 2012,
http://www.wired.com/underwire/2011/08/ernie-cline-ready-player-one/.
John Scalzi, “The Big Idea: Ernest Cline,” posted August 16, 2011, http://www
.wired.com/underwire/2011/08/ernie-cline-ready-player-one/, also qtd. in
Maslin, “A Future Wrapped in 1980s Culture.”
Bernard Suits, The Grasshopper: Games, Life and Utopia, rev. ed. (Peterborough:
Broadview Press, 2005); Jane McGonigal, Reality Is Broken: Why Games Make
Us Better and How They Can Change the World (New York: Penguin, 2011).
Cline, Ready Player One, 120.
7. Thomas More, Utopia. Norton Critical Edition (New York: W. W. Norton,
1992); Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Herland. New York: Pantheon, 1979.
8. Philip Abbott, “Utopians at Play,” Utopian Studies (Winter 2004): 44–62; 44. For
a contrasting vision of utopians and play, see Edward Rothstein, “Utopia and Its
Discontents,” in Rothstein, Herbert Muschamp, and Martin Marty, Visions of
Utopia (New York: Oxford University Press, 2004); Krishan Kumar, Utopia and
Anti-Utopia in Modern Times (New York: Blackwell, 1991).
9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Abbott, “Utopians at Play,” 45, 58.
Cline, Ready Player One, 17–18.
Cline, Ready Player One, 34.
Qtd in Scalzi, “The Big Idea: Ernest Cline.”
Cline, Ready Player One, 56.
Cline, Ready Player One, 33.
Cline, Ready Player One, 105. Wade makes this point several times throughout
the novel. Reflecting on the multiplicity of games and the all-consuming nature
of OASIS experience, he explains, “I was now playing a simulation within a
simulations. A game within a game” (202).
16. 17. Cline, Ready Player One, 120.
Cline, Ready Player One, 198.
18. Cline, Ready Player One, 198, 276. In “A Future Wrapped in 1980s Culture,”
Maslin points out Cline’s paradoxical description of OASIS gaming. While the
OASIS is a direct contrast to “an impoverished, resource-depleted Earth,” she
notes, relationships between “gunters” are tinged with sadness because “They
live as shut-ins and don’t know one another in the flesh.”
19. Cline, Ready Player One, 371.
20. Cline, Ready Player One, 364.
21. Suits, The Grasshopper, 27.
22. Suits, The Grasshopper, 21.
23. Suits, The Grasshopper, 48–49, 55. For Suits’ earlier attempt to define game play,
see Suits, “What Is a Game,” Philosophy of Science (1967): 316–21.
24. Suits admits that he is not only defining but playing a game toward the end of
his book, when the grasshopper wonders out loud, “Why doesn’t he simply
argue his position in a straightforward manner, like other authors who produce
philosophical works? Why introduce the fanciful complication of presenting
his thesis through the mouths . . . of three insects. . . . He has created a game by
imposing upon his philosophical enterprise a constitutive rule which requires
him to express his arguments only within those literary constraints” (143–44).
Thus, Suits creates a debate not simply between the insects in his book, but
between its protagonist and the author himself.
25. Suits, The Grasshopper, 141, 149–50.
26. Suits, The Grasshopper, 150–51.
27. Cline, Ready Player One, 201.
28. Suits, The Grasshopper, 151. To state Suits’ understanding of utopia in positive
terms—since an idyllic human existence would certainly include harmonious
relationships, abundant leisure, good physical and mental health, and ­ abundant
resources, these would all be included in Suits’ philosophy of utopia.
29. Suits, The Grasshopper, 154–58.
30. 31. Suits, “Is Life a Game We Are Playing,” Ethics (April 1967): 209–13.
Suits, “The Detective Story: A Case Study of Games in Literature,” Canadian
Review of Comparative Literature (June 1985): 200–219; 201, 212.
32. Suits, “The Grasshopper: Posthumous Reflections on Utopia,” in Utopias,
edited by Peter Alexander and Roger Gill, 197–209 (La Salle, IL: Open Court
Publication Co., 1984), 197, 198. Numerous utopian texts reflect on the necessity
of games to provide residents of a perfect society with something to do. In
some cases, such as Ian Banks’s “Culture” series, games are necessary to provide
excitement in a society that has become bored. In others, such as Orson Scott
Card’s Ender’s Game, the futuristic society depends on game play as protection
from alien invaders. See Banks, The Player of Games (New York: Orbit Books,
1988); Card, Ender’s Game, rev. ed. (New York: Tor Books, 2010).
33. Suits, The Grasshopper: Posthumous Reflections, 208.
34. Suits, The Grasshopper, 159.
35. McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 4.
36. Cline, Ready Player One, 13.
37. McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 22, 27, 28.
38. McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 4; Cline, Ready Player One, 14.
39. McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 6, 7, 10, 13.
40. McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 13.
41. McGonigal, Reality Is Broken, 43.
42. Cline, Ready Player One, 364.
